Blog VoWiFi IMSI leak (#32)
omnicate/omnicate.github.io: pages/blog/_posts/2020-03-30-catch-imsi-from-vowifi-session.md

---
layout: blogpost
permalink: /blog/vowifi-imsi-leak/
title: VoWifi leaking IMSI
date: 2020-03-30
tags: telco 4g epdg vowifi networking security
author: <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/rskjetlein/">Roger Skjetlein</a>
---

> 4g offers more services than the earlier generation such as 3g and 2g. One of

Reviewer: Capital "G" for 4G, 3G and 2G.

Author: fixed

> the service that really have gained traction later years is VoLTE, that is Voice

Reviewer 2: `service` -> `services`
`really have` -> `has really`
`VoLTE, that is voice over LTE` -> `VoLTE (Voice over LTE)`
`and later that we will go more in dept regarding security is VoWifi` // I think some words are missing here.
`VoWifi, Voice over Wifi.` -> `VoWifi (Voice over Wifi).`

Author: Fixed

over LTE and later that we will go more in dept regarding security is VoWifi,
Voice over Wifi.

VoWifi is beneficial in terms of using any Wifi connection offering public

> internet access thus extending and improving the coverage and connectivity.

Reviewer 2: > VoWifi is beneficial in terms of using any Wifi connection offering public
internet access

It feels like something is missing here. Using it for what?

Author: fixed

> Think of it in similar ways of building our own eNodeB cellular network, but

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Think of it as building our own eNodeB cellular network, but
```

Reviewer: Also remove "eNodeB".

Author: fixed

using commodity wifi components instead and avoiding the strict regulation and

> licensing spectrum.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using commodity wifi components instead and avoiding the strict regulation and
licensing of spectrum.
```

> 

Reviewer: Add "In practice, this allows oneself to make and receive voice calls and SMS from a Wifi access point without the need for cellular coverage, and seamlessly handover calls between Wifi <-> 4G."

## What is IMSI
*The international mobile subscriber identity (IMSI) is a number that uniquely
identifies every user of a cellular network.[1] It is stored as a 64-bit field
and is sent by the mobile device to the network. It is also used for acquiring
other details of the mobile in the home location register (HLR) or as locally
copied in the visitor location register. To prevent eavesdroppers from
identifying and tracking the subscriber on the radio interface, the IMSI is sent

> as rarely as possible and a randomly-generated TMSI is sent instead.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The international mobile subscriber identity (IMSI) is a number that uniquely
> identifies every user of a cellular network.[1] It is stored as a 64-bit field
> and is sent by the mobile device to the network. It is also used for acquiring
> other details of the mobile in the home location register (HLR) or as locally
> copied in the visitor location register. To prevent eavesdroppers from
> identifying and tracking the subscriber on the radio interface, the IMSI is sent
> as rarely as possible and a randomly-generated TMSI is sent instead.
```

Reviewer 2: Should probably remove the `[1]`.

Author: Fixed

* [IMSI article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_mobile_subscriber_identity)

### Security implications
The IMSI is a secret identifier stored on the sim and can be exploited in many

> ways once known and bound to sim so changing UE will not help.

Reviewer 2: ```
The IMSI is a secret identifier stored on the sim and can be exploited in many
ways once known and bound to sim so changing UE will not help.
```
I'm not sure, but I think maybe:

```
The IMSI is a secret identifier stored on the sim and can be exploited in many
ways once known. It is bound to the sim, so changing UE will not help.
```

What is UE ?

Author: Fixed

Examples:
* Locating user (UE)
* Intercepting calls
* Intercepting SMS (stealing two factor pin eg.)
* ..and more

## How VoWifi works
When your phone is connected to datanetwork and with volte and vowifi enabled
the device (UE) establish sip session directly to packetgateway via 4g, and via
public internet to epdg (evolved packet data gateway) which is in essence a
ipsec (ikev2) termination using SIM-AKA to authenticate UE. The ipsec comes into
play since epdg is exposed publicly.

> I won't go further in depth for volte and vowifi since there are already

Reviewer 2: This is the only place in the blog post where you write from a first person perspective.

Author: Fixed

excellent articles about the matter:
* [Voice over WLAN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voice_over_WLAN)
* [Voice over LTE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voice_over_LTE)

> ![VoWifi topology](/img/blog/vowifi-imsi-leak/vowifi.jpg)

Reviewer: We should use our own graphic here instead of Huawei. It's also confusing how they presented it (Native VoWifi is what we refer to in this article).

Reviewer: Also the image may be subject to copyright.

Author: Great. I'll just push it and we change it when you find something better.

> 

Reviewer: "To enable VoWifi on your device, please refer to your device manufacturer website:
- Android (https://support.google.com/phoneapp/answer/2811843?hl=en)
- Apple (https://support.apple.com/en-in/HT203032)
Also check on your operator website if VoWifi is supported in your region. Please note that VoWifi is usually blocked when roaming.

Author: added

## EPDG exposed on the public internet
The Evolved Packet Data Gateway needs to be publicly available on the internet
since UE needs to access it from an arbitrary no-trusted connection. The ipsec
will secure and encrypt both the data and maintain the integrity of the
connection throughout the session.

The UE finds the epdg termination point by looking dns records partly following
a convention decided by 3gpp and typically looks like this in DNS:

```

> epdg.epc.mnc001.mcc242.pub.3gppnetwork.org. 3488 IN A 77.16.1.126

Reviewer: Please remove mention of the network. Anonymize MNC and MCC by replacing it with 999.
Also change the IP address to some of ours or private.

Author: Fixed

epdg.epc.mnc001.mcc242.pub.3gppnetwork.org. 3488 IN A 77.16.1.125
```

> From the DNS records we recognize the network operator and and the country code,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the DNS records we recognize the network operator and the country code,
```

Author: Fixed

> in case corresponds to Norway (242) and Telenor (001).

Reviewer: We shouldn't identify any network in particular. We haven't asked Telenor permission even if those are public information.

Reviewer 2: This code review is already public. Do we have to get rid of it?

Reviewer: Since it's public info, it's ok to keep the code review. But since we haven't worked with them on this, I suggest to not name them in the blog post.

Author: Removed info

> The DNS records are registered under under a delegated domain owned by GSMA and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The DNS records are registered under a delegated domain owned by GSMA and
```

Author: Fixed

> usually are redelegated to operator under their own umbrella like the example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
usually are redelegated to operators under their own umbrella, like the example
```

Author: Fixed

> mnc001.mcc242.pub.3gppnetwork.org.

Reviewer: 999 instead of 001 and 242.

Author: Done

## The problem
When UE establish session to epdg it uses a vpn, a ipsec relationship using
IKEv2 for authentication, encryption and integrity.

So far the implementation works as intended and provides good security through
encryption and security.

The problem is not the VoWifi per see, by rather how ipsec establish the
session. When UE connects to the epdg, it acts as a initiator and the epdg is
inherently passive since it cannot know where from (ip) the UE will come from.

> ![sim-aka flow](/img/blog/vowifi-imsi-leak/sim-aka.png)

Reviewer: Same problem with the graphic here. It's also incorrect when mentioning SS7 to HSS. We can easily do our own use swimlanes.io. I can look at it a little later.

Author: Great. I'll push and we can update later

### EAP-AKA exposes identity
Vowifi as mentioned earlier utilises an encryption protocol based on the widely
adopted Extensible Authentication Protocol. EAP itself is just a protocol and
does not define the contents of the data or how exact the data exchanges look

> like. EAP-AKA unfortunately exposes user identity in the clear unencrypted during

Reviewer 2: > "EAP-AKA unfortunately exposes user identity in the clear unencrypted" 

sounds like it should be either:

> "EAP-AKA unfortunately exposes user identity as plaintext"

or

> "EAP-AKA unfortunately exposes the unencrypted user identity "

Author: Fixed

imsi.

#### Solution
This is the hardest problem to solve since it needs a security layer or settings
that comes before ipsec starts to connect.

The proposed solutions
* Force the use of conservative peer for eap-aka/sim
and use pseudonym identity (tmsi) to avoid exposing imsi.
* Enable EAP-TTLS in addition to EAP-AKA/SIM
* Only connect trusted/encrypted AP's

### Fake Ipsec termination exposes identity
By impersonating a epdg by redirecting all dns requests for any
`pub.3gppnetwork.org.` to our own fake ipsec termination providing just enough
to catch the imsi.

A raspberry pie can easily be setup to constantly scan for open wifi networks,
then impersonating the ssid in hope of lure ue's to connect. Any UE set to use
VoWiFi connecting to the fake access point will give away their imsi.

A wifi ssid scan example of what we can automate. In this case the Isfjell-Guest
would have been picked to catch imsi since its open and unencrypted:

![wifi-ssid](/img/blog/vowifi-imsi-leak/wlan-ssid.png)

Snippet from the ipsec termination, UE (iPhone 8) exposes imsi several times:
```
13[ENC] parsed IKE_AUTH request 2 [ EAP/RES/AKA ]

> 13[IKE] '0242014511******@wlan.mnc001.mcc242.3gppnetwork.org' is not a reauth identity

Reviewer: Replace IMSI with 09999994511**** and MNC MCC

Author: Done
